involved in such transactions, these transporters are usually called ion exchangers (Figure 4.10, right).
An example of such a transporter is the Na^{+}/Ca^{2+} exchanger, which shares with the Ca^{2+} pump the important job of keeping intracellular Ca^{2+} concentrations low (Figure 4.10C).
Another exchanger in this category regulates both intracellular Cl^{--} concentration and pH by swapping intracellular Cl^{--} for another extracellular anion, bicarbonate (Figure 4.10D).
Other ion exchangers, such as the Na^{+}/H^{+} exchanger (Figure 4.10E), also regulate intracellular pH, in this case by acting directly on the concentration of H^{+}.
Yet other ion exchangers are involved in transporting neurotransmitters into synaptic terminals (Figure 4.10F), as described in Chapter 6.
Although the electrochemical gradient of Na^{+} (or other counter ions) is the proximate source of energy for ion exchangers, these gradients ultimately depend on the hydrolysis of ATP by ATPase pumps, such as the Na^{+}/K^{+} ATPase pump.

### Functional Properties of the Na^{+}/K^{+} Pump

Of these various transporters, the best understood is the Na^{+}/K^{+} pump.
The activity of this pump is estimated to account for 20--40% of the brain's energy consumption, indicating its importance for brain function.
The Na^{+} pump was first discovered in neurons in the 1950s, when Richard Keynes at Cambridge University used radioactive Na^{+} to demonstrate the energy-dependent efflux of Na^{+} from squid giant axons.
Keynes and his collaborators found that this efflux ceased when the supply of ATP in the axon was interrupted by treatment with metabolic poisons (Figure 4.11A, point 4).
Other conditions that lower intracellular ATP also prevent Na^{+} efflux.
These experiments showed that removing intracellular Na^{+} requires cellular metabolism.
Further studies with radioactive K^{+} demonstrated that Na^{+} efflux is associated with simultaneous, ATP-dependent influx of K^{+}.
These opposing fluxes of Na^{+} and K^{+} are operationally inseparable: Removal of external K^{+} greatly reduces Na^{+} efflux (Figure 4.11, point 2), and vice versa.
These energy-dependent movements of Na^{+} and K^{+} implicated an ATP-hydrolyzing Na^{+}/K^{+} pump in the generation of the transmembrane gradients of both Na^{+} and K^{+}.
The exact mechanism responsible for these fluxes of Na^{+} and K^{+} is still not entirely clear, but the pump is thought to alternately shuttle these ions across the membranes in a cycle fueled by the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to the pump protein (Figure 4.11B).

Additional quantitative studies of the movements of Na^{+} and K^{+} indicate that the two ions are not pumped at identical rates: The K^{+} influx is only about two-thirds the Na^{+} efflux.
Thus, the pump apparently transports two K^{+} into the cell for every three Na^{+} that are removed (see Figure 4.11B).
This stoichiometry causes a net loss of one positively charged ion from inside of the cell during each round of pumping, meaning that the pump generates an electrical current that can hyperpolarize the membrane potential.
For this reason, the Na^{+}/K^{+} pump is said to be electrogenic.
Because pumps act much more slowly than ion channels, the current produced by the Na^{+}/K^{+} pump is quite small.
For example, in the squid axon, the net current generated by the pump is less than 1% of the current flowing through voltage-gated Na^{+} channels and affects the resting membrane potential by only a millivolt or less.

Although the electrical current generated by the activity of the Na^{+}/K^{+} pump is small, under special circumstances the pump can significantly influence the membrane potential.
For instance, prolonged stimulation of