The Somatic Sensory System 199

sity and muscle size is consistent with the generalization that the sensory motor apparatus at all levels of the nervous system is much richer for the hands, head, speech organs, and other parts of the body that are used to perform especially important and demanding tasks.
Spindles are lacking altogether in a few muscles, such as those of the middle ear, which do not require the kind of feedback that these receptors provide.

Whereas muscle spindles are specialized to signal changes in muscle length, low-threshold mechanoreceptors in tendons inform the central nervous system about changes in muscle tension.
These mechanoreceptors, called Golgi tendon organs, are innervated by branches of group Ib afferents and are distributed among the collagen fibers that form the tendons (see Chapter 15).

Finally, rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors in and around joints gather dynamic information about limb position and joint movement.
The function of these joint receptors is not well understood.

## Active Tactile Exploration

Tactile discrimination—that is, perceiving the detailed shape or texture of an object—normally entails active exploration.
In humans, this is typically accomplished by using the hands to grasp and manipulate objects, or by moving the fingers across a surface so that a sequence of contacts between the skin and the object of interest is established.
Psychophysical evidence indicates that relative movement between the skin and a surface is the single most important requirement for accurate discrimination of texture.
Animal experiments confirm the dependence of tactile discrimination on active exploration.
Rats, for instance, discriminate the details of texture by rhythmically brushing their facial whiskers across surfaces.
Active touching, which is called haptics, involves the interpretation of complex spatiotemporal patterns of stimuli that are likely to activate many classes of mechanoreceptors.
Haptics also requires dynamic interactions between motor and sensory signals, which presumably induce sensory responses in central neurons that differ from the responses of the same cells during passive stimulation of the skin (see Box B).

## The Major Afferent Pathway for Mechanosensory Information: The Dorsal Column–Medial Lemniscus System

The action potentials generated by tactile and other mechanosensory stimuli are transmitted to the spinal cord by afferent sensory axons traveling in the peripheral nerves.
The neuronal cell bodies that give rise to these first-order axons are located in the dorsal root (or sensory) ganglia associated with each segmental spinal nerve (see Figure 8.1 and Box C).
Dorsal root ganglion cells are also known as first-order neurons because they initiate the sensory process.
The ganglion cells thus give rise to long peripheral axons that end in the somatic receptor specializations already described, and shorter central axons that reach the dorsolateral region of the spinal cord via the dorsal (sensory) roots of each spinal cord segment.
The large myelinated fibers that innervate low-threshold mechanoreceptors are derived from the largest neurons in these ganglia, whereas the smaller ganglion cells give rise to smaller afferent nerve fibers that end in the high-threshold nociceptors and thermocceptors (see Table 8.1).

Depending on whether they belong to the mechanosensory system or to the pain and temperature system, the first-order axons carrying information