membrane potential of the photoreceptor that are induced by phototransduction events in the outer segment.
How these events lead to surround suppression in an on-center ganglion cell is illustrated in Figure 10.19.
A small spot of light centered on a photoreceptor supplying input to the center of the ganglion cell's receptive field produces a strong hyperpolarizing response in the photoreceptor.
Under these conditions, changes in the membrane potential of the horizontal cells that synapse with the photoreceptor terminal are relatively small, and the response of the photoreceptor to light is largely determined by its phototransduction cascade (Figure10.19B).
With the addition of light to the surround, however, the impact of the horizontal network becomes significantly greater; the light-induced reduction in the release of glutamate from the photoreceptors in the surround leads to a strong hyperpolarization of the horizontal cells whose processes converge on the terminal of the photoreceptor in the receptive field center.
The reduction in GABA release from the horizontal cells has a depolarizing effect on the membrane potential of the central photoreceptor, reducing the light-evoked response and ultimately reducing the firing rate of the on-center ganglion cell.

Thus, even at the earliest stages in visual processing, neural signals do not represent the absolute numbers of photons that are captured by receptors, but rather the relative intensity of stimulation—how much the current level of stimulation differs from ambient levels.
While it may seem that the actions of horizontal cells decrease the sensitivity of the retina, they play a critical role in allowing the full range of the photoreceptor's electrical response (about 30 mV) to be applied to the limited range of stimulus intensities that are present at any given moment.
The network mechanisms of adaptation described here function in conjunction with cellular mechanisms in the receptor outer segments that regulate the sensitivity of the phototransduction cascade at different light levels.
Together, they allow retinal circuits to convey the most salient aspects of luminance changes to the central stages of the visual system described in the following chapter.

### Summary

The light that falls on photoreceptors is transformed by retinal circuitry into a pattern of action potentials that ganglion cell axons convey to the visual centers in the brain.
This process begins with phototransduction, a biochemical cascade that ultimately regulates the opening and closing of ion channels in the membrane of the photoreceptor's outer segment, and thereby the amount of neurotransmitter the photoreceptor releases.
Two systems of photoreceptors—rods and cones—allow the visual system to meet the conflicting demands of sensitivity and acuity, respectively.
Retinal ganglion cells operate quite differently from the photoreceptor cells.
The center-surround arrangement of ganglion cell receptive fields makes these neurons particularly sensitive to luminance contrast and relatively insensitive to the overall level of illumination.
It also allows the retina to adapt, such that it can respond effectively over the enormous range of illuminant intensities in the world.
The underlying organization is generated by the synaptic interactions between photoreceptors, horizontal cells, and bipolar cells in the outer plexiform layer.
As a result, the signal sent to the visual centers in the brain is already highly processed when it leaves the retina, emphasizing those aspects of the visual scene that convey the most information.