The Auditory System 285

# Box A

## Four Causes of Acquired Hearing Loss

Acquired hearing loss is an increasingly common sensory deficit that can often lead to impaired oral communication and social isolation.
Four major causes of acquired hearing loss are acoustical trauma, infection of the inner ear, ototoxic drugs, and presbyacusis (literally, the hearing of the old).

The exquisite sensitivity of the auditory periphery, combined with the direct mechanical linkage between the acoustical stimulus and the receptor cells, make the ear especially susceptible to acute or chronic acoustical trauma.
Extremely loud, percussive sounds, such as those generated by explosives or gunfire, can rupture the eardrum and so severely distort the inner ear that the organ of Corti is torn.
The resultant loss of hearing is abrupt and often quite severe.
Less well appreciated is the fact that repeated exposure to less dramatic but nonetheless loud sounds, including those produced by industrial or household machinery or by amplified musical instruments, can also damage the inner ear.
Although these sounds leave the eardrum intact, specific damage is done to the hair bundle itself; the stereocilia of cochlear hair cells of animals exposed to loud sounds shear off at their pivot points with the hair cell body, or fuse together in a platelike fashion that impedes movement.
In humans, the mechanical resonance of the ear to stimulus frequencies centered about $3\mathrm{kHz}$ means that exposure to loud, broadband noises (such as those generated by jet engines) results in especially pronounced deficits near this resonant frequency.

Ototoxic drugs include aminoglycoside antibiotics (such as gentamycin and kanamycin), which directly affect hair cells, and ethacrynic acid, which poisons the potassium-extruding cells of the stria vascularis that generate the endocochlear potential.
In the absence of these ion pumping cells, the endocochlear potential, which supplies the energy to drive the transduction process, is lost.
Although still a matter of some debate, the relatively nonselective transduction channel apparently affords a means of entry for aminoglycoside antibiotics,

which then poison hair cells by disrupting phosphoinositide metabolism.
In particular, outer hair cells and those inner hair cells that transduce high-frequency stimuli are more affected, simply because of their greater energy requirements.

Finally, presbyacusis, the hearing loss associated with aging, may in part stem from atherosclerotic damage to the especially fine microvasculature of the inner ear, as well as from genetic predispositions to hair cell damage.
Recent advances in understanding the genetic transmission of acquired hearing loss in both humans and mice point to mutations in myosin isoforms unique to hair cells as a likely culprit.

## References

HOLT, J.
R.
AND D.
P.
COREY (1999) Ion channel defects in hereditary hearing loss.
Neuron 22: 217-219.
KEATS, B.
J.
AND D.
P.
COREY (1999) The usher syndromes.
Amer.
J.
Med.
Gen.
89: 158-166.
PRIUSKA, E.
M.
AND J.
SCHACT (1997) Mechanism and prevention of aminoglycoside ototoxicity: Outer hair cells as targets and tools.
Ear, Nose, Throat J.
76: 164-171.

## A Synopsis of Auditory Function

The auditory system transforms sound waves into distinct patterns of neural activity, which are then integrated with information from other sensory systems to guide behavior, including orienting movements to acoustical stimuli and intraspecies communication.
The first stage of this transformation occurs at the external and middle ears, which collect sound waves and amplify their pressure, so that the sound energy in the air can be successfully transmitted to the fluid-filled cochlea of the inner ear.
In the inner ear, a series of biomechanical processes occur that break up the signal into simpler, sinusoidal components, with the result that the frequency, amplitude, and phase of the original signal are all faithfully transduced by the sensory hair cells and encoded by the electrical activity of the auditory nerve fibers.
One product of this process of acoustical decomposition is the systematic representation of sound frequency along the length of the cochlea, referred to as tonotopy, which is an important organizational feature preserved