The Chemical Senses 359

charide sweeteners such as amino acids activate $\mathrm{IP}_3$ pathways.
Thus the perceptual experience of "sweet" encompasses much more than the taste of sucrose.
It can be elicited by various sensory transduction mechanisms, and may generate sensory qualities different from those generated by sucrose.

Taste sensitivity for salt also relies on a number of mechanisms.
Not all salts, or even all monovalent chloride salts, activate the same pathway.
Psychophysical studies have shown that amiloride, a diuretic that blocks $\mathrm{Na^{+}}$ entry through amiloride-sensitive $\mathrm{Na^{+}}$ channels, decreases the taste intensity of NaCl and LiCl, but not KCl.
Although LiCl tastes salty, it cannot be used as a substitute for NaCl because it has profound effects on the central nervous system—clinically, LiCl is used to treat bipolar disorders.
Sodium succinate, $\mathrm{NH_4Cl}$, and CsCl do not taste exclusively salty.
Indeed, CsCl has a bitter or salty-bitter taste that probably arises from the inhibition of $\mathrm{K^{+}}$ channels.
Additional evidence for a distinct receptor for NaCl comes from developmental studies.
Infants up to 4 months old can distinguish between water and sucrose (and lactose), water and acid, and water and bitter tastants, but they cannot distinguish between water and a $0.2\,\mathrm{M}$ NaCl solution.
Thus, either the receptor for $\mathrm{Na^{+}}$ has not yet been expressed, or, if expressed, it is not yet functional.
Infants between the ages of 4 and 6 months, however, can discriminate between NaCl solutions and water, and children can detect the full salty taste of NaCl at about 4 years of age.

Clearly, a given individual's perception of tastants results from many idiosyncracies of the taste system.
These idiosyncracies may underlie personal preferences and aversions that lead to individual variation in ingestive behaviors (eating and drinking).
The French aphorism *chacun à son goût* ("each to his own taste") reflects not only individual preferences but the biology of the taste-sensing system.

## The Organization of the Peripheral Taste System

Approximately 4000 taste buds in humans are distributed throughout the oral cavity and upper alimentary canal.
Taste buds are about $50\,\mathrm{mm}$ wide at their base and approximately $80\,\mathrm{mm}$ long, each containing 30 to 100 taste cells (the sensory receptor cells), plus a few basal cells (Figure 14.14B–D).
About $75\%$ percent of all taste buds are found on the dorsal surface of the tongue in small elevations called papillae (see Figure 14.14A).
There are three types of papillae: fungiform (which contain about $25\%$ of the total number of taste buds), circumvallate (which contain $50\%$ of the taste buds), and foliate (which contain $25\%$).
Fungiform papillae are found only on the anterior two-thirds of the tongue; the highest density (about $30/\mathrm{cm}^2$) is at the tip.
Fungiform papillae have a mushroom-like structure (hence their name) and typically have about 3 taste buds at their apical surface.
There are 9 circumvallate papillae arranged in a chevron at the rear of the tongue.
Each consists of a circular trench containing about 250 taste buds along the trench walls.
Two foliate papillae are present on the posterolateral tongue, each having about 20 parallel ridges with about 600 taste buds in their walls.
Thus, chemical stimuli on the tongue first stimulate receptors in the fungiform papillae and then in the foliate and circumvallate papillae.
Tastants subsequently stimulate scattered taste buds in the pharynx, larynx, and upper esophagus.

Taste cells in individual taste buds (see Figure 14.14C,D) synapse with primary afferent axons from branches of three cranial nerves: the facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagus (X) nerves (see Figure 14.13).
The taste cells in fungiform papillae on the anterior tongue are innervated exclusively by the