Chapter Fourteen

chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve; in circumvallate papillae, the taste cells are innervated exclusively by the lingual branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve; and in the palate they are innervated by the greater superior petrosal branch of the facial nerve.
Taste buds of the epiglottis and esophagus are innervated by the superior laryngeal branch of the vagus nerve.

The initiating events of chemosensory transduction occur in the taste cells, which have receptors on microvilli that emerge from the apical surface of the taste cell (see Figure 14.14D and 14.15).
The apical surfaces of individual taste cells in taste buds are clustered in a small opening (about 1 mm) near the surface of the tongue called a taste pore.
The synapses that relay the receptor activity are made onto the afferent axons of the various cranial nerves at the basal surface.
Like olfactory receptor neurons (and presumably for the same reasons), taste cells have a lifetime of only about 2 weeks and are normally regenerated from basal cells.

## Taste Receptors and the Transduction of Taste Signals

The major perceptual categories of taste—salty, sour, sweet, umami, and bitter—are represented by five distinct classes of taste receptors.
These receptors are found in the apical microvilli of taste cells.
Salty and sour tastes are primarily elicited by ionic stimuli such as the positively charged ions in salts (like Na⁺ from NaCl), or the H⁺ in acids (acetic acid, for example, which gives vinegar its sour taste).
These ions in salty and sour tastants initiate sensory transduction via specific ion channels: the amiloride-sensitive Na⁺ channel for salty tastes, and an H⁺-sensitive, cation-selective channel for sour (Figures 14.15 and 14.16).
The receptor potential generated by the positive inward current carried either by Na⁺ for salty or H⁺ for sour depolarizes the taste cell.
This initial depolarization leads to the activation of voltage-gated Na⁺ channels in the basolateral aspect of the taste cell.
This additional depolarization activates voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels, leading to the release of neurotransmitter from the basal aspect of the taste cell and the activation of action potentials in ganglion cell axons (Figure 14.15).

In humans and other mammals, sweet and amino acid (umami) receptors are heteromeric G-protein-coupled receptors that share a common seven-transmembrane receptor subunit called T1R3, which is paired with the T1R2 seven-transmembrane receptor for perception of sweet, or with the T1R1 receptor for amino acids (Figure 14.16).
The T1R2 and T1R1 receptors are expressed in different subsets of taste cells, indicating that there are, respectively, sweet- and amino acid-selective cells in the taste buds (see Figure 14.17).
Upon binding sugars or other sweet stimuli, the T1R2/T1R3 receptor initiates a G-protein-mediated signal transduction cascade that leads to the activation of the phospholipase C isoform PLCβ2, leading in turn to increased concentrations of inositol triphosphate (IP₃) and to the opening of TRP channels (specifically the TRPM₅ channel), which depolarizes the taste cell via increased intracellular Ca²⁺.
Similarly, the T1R1/T1R3 receptor is broadly tuned to the 20 standard L-amino acids found in proteins (but not to their D-amino acid enantiomers).
Transduction of amino acid stimuli via the T1R1/T1R3 receptor also reflects G-protein-coupled intracellular signaling leading to PLCβ2-mediated activation of the TRPM₅ channel and depolarization of the taste cell (see Figure 14.16).

Another family of G-protein-coupled receptors known as the T2R receptors transduce bitter tastes.
There are approximately 30 T2R subtypes en