the various classes of motor units also explain some structural differences among muscle groups.
For example, a motor unit in the soleus (a muscle important for posture that comprises mostly small, slow units) has an average innervation ratio of 180 muscle fibers for each motor neuron.
In contrast, the gastrocnemius, a muscle that comprises both small and larger units, has an innervation ratio of ~1000--2000 muscle fibers per motor neuron, and can generate forces needed for sudden changes in body position.
More subtle variations are present in athletes on different training regimens.
Thus, muscle biopsies show that sprinters have a larger proportion of powerful but rapidly fatiguing pale fibers in their leg muscles than do marathoners.
Other differences are related to the highly specialized functions of particular muscles.
For instance, the eyes require rapid, precise movements but little strength; in consequence, extraocular muscle motor units are extremely small (with an average innervation ratio of only 3!) and have a very high proportion of muscle fibers capable of contracting with maximal velocity.

### The Regulation of Muscle Force

Increasing or decreasing the number of motor units active at any one time changes the amount of force produced by a muscle.
In the 1960s, Elwood Henneman and his colleagues at Harvard Medical School found that progressive increases in muscle tension could be produced by progressively increasing the activity of axons that provide input to the relevant pool of lower motor neurons.
This gradual increase in tension results from the recruitment of motor units in a fixed order according to their size.
By stimulating either sensory nerves or upper motor pathways that project to a lower motor neuron pool while measuring the tension changes in the muscle, Henneman found that in experimental animals only the smallest motor units in the pool are activated by weak synaptic stimulation.
When synaptic input increases, progressively larger motor units that generate larger forces are recruited: As the synaptic activity driving a motor neuron pool increases, low threshold S units are recruited first, then FR units, and finally, at the highest levels of activity, the FF units.
Since these original experiments, evidence for the orderly recruitment of motor units has been found in a variety of voluntary and reflexive movements.
As a result, this systematic relationship has come to be known as the size principle.

An illustration of how the size principle operates for the motor units of the medial gastrocnemius muscle in the cat is shown in Figure 15.6.
When the animal is standing quietly, the force measured directly from the muscle tendon is only a small fraction (about 5%) of the total force that the muscle can generate.
The force is provided by the S motor units, which make up about 25% of the motor units in this muscle.
When the cat begins to walk, larger forces are necessary: locomotor activities that range from slow walking to fast running require up to 25% of the muscle's total force capacity.
This additional need is met by the recruitment of FR units.
Only movements such as galloping and jumping, which are performed infrequently and for short periods, require the full power of the muscle; such demands are met by the recruitment of the FF units.
Thus, the size principle provides a simple solution to the problem of grading muscle force: The combination of motor units activated by such orderly recruitment optimally matches the physiological properties of different motor unit types with the range of forces required to perform different motor tasks.

The frequency of the action potentials generated by motor neurons also contributes to the regulation of muscle tension.
The increase in force that