map than does the musculature requiring less precise motor control (such as that of the trunk).
The behavioral implications of cortical motor maps are considered in Boxes C and D.

The introduction in the 1960s of intracortical microstimulation (a more refined method of cortical activation) allowed a more detailed understanding of motor maps.
Microstimulation entails the delivery of electrical currents an order of magnitude smaller than those used by Sherrington and Penfield.
By passing the current through the sharpened tip of a metal microelectrode inserted into the cortex, the upper motor neurons in layer V that project to lower motor neuron circuitry can be stimulated focally.
Although intracortical stimulation generally confirmed Penfield's spatial map in the motor cortex, it also showed that the finer organization of the map is rather different than most neuroscientists imagined.
For example, when microstimulation was combined with recordings of muscle electrical activity, even the smallest currents capable of eliciting a response initiated the excitation of several muscles (and the simultaneous inhibition of others), suggesting that organized movements rather than individual muscles are represented in the map (see Box C).
Furthermore, within major subdivisions of the map (e.g.
arm, forearm, or finger regions), a particular movement could be elicited by stimulation of widely separated sites, indicating that neurons in nearby regions are linked by local circuits to organize specific movements.
This interpretation has been supported by the observation that the regions responsible for initiating different movements overlap substantially.

About the same time that these studies were being undertaken, Ed Evarts and his colleagues at the National Institutes of Health were pioneering a technique in which implanted microelectrodes were used to record the electrical activity of individual motor neurons in awake, behaving monkeys.
In these experiments, the monkeys were trained to perform a variety of motor tasks, thus providing a means of correlating neuronal activity with voluntary movements.
Evarts and his group found that the force generated by contracting muscles changed as a function of the firing rate of upper motor neurons.
Moreover, the firing rates of the active neurons often changed prior to movements involving very small forces.
Evarts therefore proposed that the primary motor cortex contributes to the initial phase of recruitment of lower motor neurons involved in the generation of finely controlled movements.
Additional experiments showed that the activity of primary motor neurons is correlated not only with the magnitude, but also with the direction of the force produced by muscles.
Thus, some neurons show progressively less activity as the direction of movement deviates from the neuron's “preferred direction.”

A further advance was made in the mid-1970s by the introduction of spike-triggered averaging (Figure 16.10).
By correlating the timing of the cortical neuron's discharges with the onset times of the contractions generated by the various muscles used in a movement, this method provides a way of measuring the influence of a single cortical motor neuron on a population of lower motor neurons in the spinal cord.
Recording such activity from different muscles as monkeys performed wrist flexion or extension demonstrated that the activity of a number of different muscles is directly facilitated by the discharges of a given upper motor neuron.
This peripheral muscle group is referred to as the “muscle field” of the upper motor neuron.
On average, the size of the muscle field in the wrist region is two to three muscles per upper motor neuron.
These observations confirmed that single upper motor neurons contact several lower motor neuron pools; the results are also consistent with the general conclusion that movements, rather than individual muscles,