Further experiments in the amphibian and avian visual systems made the strictest form of the chemoaffinity hypothesis—labeling of each tectal location by a different recognition molecule—untenable.
Rather than precise “lock and key” affinity, the behavior of growing axons suggested that there are gradients of cell surface molecules to which growing axons respond to establish the basic axes of the retinotopic map.
Normally, axons from the temporal region of the retina innervate the anterior pole of the tectum and avoid the posterior pole.
Embryological experiments in which temporal and nasal regions of the retina or anterior and posterior regions of the tectum were reversed in their position suggested that there was some specificity.
This specificity, however, was not absolute—if only posterior tectum was available to temporal retina axons, the axons would innervate the normally inhospitable target.
Subsequent in vitro analysis showed that the specificity was generated by a comparison between different substrates.
Temporal retinal axons, when presented with a choice of cell membranes derived from anterior or posterior tectal regions as a substrate, grow exclusively on anterior membranes, avoiding membranes derived from the “wrong” region of the tectum (Figure 22.6C).
The positive interactions probably are due to increased adhesion of the growth cones to the substrate, whereas the failure to grow into inappropriate regions may result from repulsive interactions that tend to collapse the growth cones (see above).

A likely candidate for the negative guidance signal for temporal axons in the posterior tectum was subsequently purified, and its gene cloned.
The protein—initially called RAGS (repulsive axon guidance signal) and later renamed ephrin-A5—belongs to a family of ephrin ligands and Eph receptors (see Figure 22.2).
Subsequent work has associated several members of this molecular family with topographic mapping in the visual system as well as formation of axon pathways like the anterior commissure and migration of subpopulations of neural crest cells (Figure 22.6D).
Ephrin ligands are cell adhesion-like molecules that can be either transmembrane or membrane-associated proteins.
Eph receptors belong to the single transmembrane domain tyrosine receptor kinase family, and thus can directly transduce a signal from an Eph ligand.
Subsequent work has also suggested that the Ephrin ligands can generate intercellular signals upon binding with the Eph receptors via interactions with cytoplasmic kinases and related molecules.
Disruption of the genes for the Eph ligands or their receptors results in subtle disruptions in the topographic organization of the retinocollicular or retinothalamic projection.
These observations accord with the idea that chemoaffinity operates by a system of gradients in the retina and tectum that give axons and their targets markers of position, rather than a unique lock and key sort of recognition.
The Eph receptors and their ligands provide a model of how graded molecular information can help organize topographic axonal growth in the visual system and other regions of the developing brain.

### Selective Synapse Formation

After reaching the correct target or target region, axons must make a further local determination about which particular cells to innervate among a variety of potential local synaptic partners.
The choices available to an axon include: establish synaptic contacts; retract and regrow to another target; or fail to form stable connections (a choice that can result in the death of the parent neuron).
Because of the complexity of brain circuitry, this issue has been studied most thoroughly in the peripheral nervous system, particularly