plasticity as a function of age presumably provide a neurobiological basis for the general observation that human behavior is much more susceptible to normal or pathological modification early in development than later on a concept with obvious educational, psychiatric, and social implications.
Although many cellular and molecular mechanisms have been proposed to explain these effects (see Chapter 24), the specific mechanisms responsible for creating and eventually terminating critical periods remain largely unknown.

### Cellular and Molecular Correlates of Activity-Dependent Plasticity during Critical Periods

A further question for understanding how experience changes neural circuits during critical periods is how patterns of activity are transduced to modify connections and to make these changes permanent.
Clearly, the steps that initiate these processes must rely on signals generated by the synaptic activity associated with sensory experience or motor performance—the basic neural processes by which experience is represented.
Neurotransmitters and a number of other signaling molecules, including neurotrophic factors, are obvious candidates for initiating changes that occur with correlated or repeated activity.
Indeed, mice that lack genes for a number of neurotransmitters or receptors exhibit changes in experience-dependent visual cortical plasticity.
These signals—neurotransmitters and other secreted molecules like neurotrophins—are all thought to ultimately influence levels of intracellular Ca^{2+}, particularly in postsynaptic cells (Figure 23.10).
Increased Ca^{2+} concentration in the affected cells can activate a number of kinases, including Ca^{2+}/calmodulin kinase (CaMK) II, leading to phosphorylation-dependent modifications of the cytoskeleton and changes in dendritic and axonal branching.
In addition, changes in Ca^{2+} can activate other kinases found in the nucleus, including CaMK IV (see Chapter 7).
The kinases in the nucleus in turn can activate transcription factors like CREB (cyclic nucleotide response element binding transcription factor) via phosphorylation.
When activation occurs, these DNA binding proteins can then influence gene expression, and thus alter the transcriptional state of the neuron to reflect experience-driven functional changes.
Such changes may include—but are unlikely to be limited to—transcription of neurotrophin genes like BDNF.
Whether this sequence is correct or complete remains uncertain, but it provides a plausible scenario for the molecular and cellular events underlying activity-dependent plasticity.

### Evidence for Critical Periods in Other Sensory Systems

Although the neural basis of critical periods has been most thoroughly studied in the mammalian visual system, similar phenomena exist in a number of sensory systems, including the auditory, somatic sensory and olfactory systems.
In the auditory system, experiments on the role of auditory experience and neural activity in owls (who use auditory information to localize prey) indicate that neural circuits for auditory localization are similarly shaped by experience.
Thus, deafening an owl or altering neural activity during early postnatal development compromises the bird's ability to localize sounds and can alter the neural circuits that mediate this capacity.
The development of song in many species of birds provides another auditory example, as described in Chapter 12.
In the somatic sensory system, cortical maps can be changed by experience during a critical period of postnatal