Language and Speech 641

quency of the major formant arises from the fact that the approximate length of the vocal tract is 17 cm, which is the quarter wavelength of a 68-cm sound wave; quarter wavelengths determine the resonances of pipes open at one end, which is essentially what the vocal tract is.
Since the speed of sound is about 33,500 cm/sec, the lowest resonance frequency of an open tube or pipe of this length will be 33,500/68 or about 500 Hz; additional resonant frequencies will occur at the odd harmonics of this major formant (e.g., 1500 Hz, 2500 Hz, etc.).
The result of these physical facts about the vocal tract is that any power in the laryngeal source at these formant frequencies will be reinforced, and any other power will, in varying degrees, be filtered out.
Of course, this general statement is complicated by the further fact that the shape of the vocal tract changes to produce different speech sounds.
Thus, in addition to the effects of the larynx, specific speech sounds are generated by dynamic effects imposed by the configuration of the rest of the vocal tract.

In any given language, the basic speech sounds are called phonemes.
(The sound stimuli as such are referred to as phones.) Phonemes are used to make up syllables, which are used in turn to make up words, which are used to create sentences.
There are about 40 phonemes in English, and these are about equally divided between vowel and consonant speech sounds.
Vowel sounds are by and large the voiced (periodic) elements of speech (i.e., the elemental sounds in any language generated by the oscillation of the vocal cords).
In contrast, consonant sounds involve rapid changes in the sound signal and are more complex.
In English, consonants begin and/or end syllables, each of which entails a vowel sound.
Consonant sounds are categorized according to the site in the vocal tract that determines them (the place of articulation), or the physical way they are generated (the manner of articulation).
With respect to place, there are labial consonants (such as p and b), dental consonants (f and v), palatal consonants (h) (among many others).
With respect to manner, there are plosive, fricative, nasal, liquid, and semi-vowel consonants.
Plosives are produced by blocking the flow of air somewhere in the vocal tract, fricatives by producing turbulence, nasals by directing the flow of air through the nose, and so on.

A further variation on the use of consonants is found in the "click languages" of southern Africa, of which about 30 survive today.
Each of these languages has 4-5 different click sounds that are double consonants (the consonant equivalent of dipthongs) made by sucking the tongue down from the roof of the mouth.

It should be obvious then that speech stimuli are enormously complex (there are more than 200 phonemes in human languages).
To make matters worse, Alvin Liberman, working at the Haskins Laboratory at Yale University, showed that there is no one-to-one correspondence between phonemes (as defined above) and phones (i.e., the specific acoustic elements in speech).
Because speech sounds changes continuously, they cannot be split up into discrete segments, as the concept of phonemes implies.
This fact is now recognized as a fundamental problem that undermines any strictly phonemic approach to language.
Moreover, the phones for different vowels (or at least the formants) overlap in natural speech of men, women, and children.
Evidence from studies of illiterates suggests that phonemes are probably more related to learning how to read and spell than to actually hearing speech, implying that syllables or words are much better candidates for the natural units of speech perception.

Given this complexity, it is remarkable that we can communicate so readily.
A clue to the obvious success of humans in this task is computer-based speech recognition programs.
These programs achieve the very substantial success they currently enjoy by virtue of prolonged empirical training rather than in the a priori application of any logical rules.

## References

BAGLEY, W.C.
(1900-1901) The apperception of the spoken sentence: A study in the psychology of language.
Am.
J.
Psychol.
12: 80-130.
LIBERMAN, A.
M.
(1996) Speech: A Special Code.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
LIBERMAN, A.
M.
AND I.
G.
MATTINGLY (1985).
The motor theory of speech perception revised.
Cognition 21: 1-36.
MILLER, G.
A.
(1991) The Science of Words, Chapter 4, "The spoken word." New York: Scientific American Library.
MILLER, G.
A.
AND J.
C.
R.
LICKLIDER (1950) The intelligibility of interrupted speech.
J.
Acoust.
Soc.
Am.
22: 167-173.
PLOMP, R.
(2002) The Intelligent Ear: On the Nature of Sound Perception.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
WARREN, R.
M.
(1999) Auditory Perception: A New Analysis and Synthesis, Chapter 7, "Speech." Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

aphasia, also known as Broca's aphasia.
(Such aphasias must be specifically distinguished from dysarthria, which is the inability to move the muscles of the face and tongue that mediate speaking.) The deficient motor-planning aspects of expressive aphasias accord with the complex motor functions of