ing from a genetic disorder similar to the human disease.
In these animals, narcolepsy is caused by a mutation of the orexin-2 receptor gene (Orx2).
As already described, orexins are neuropeptides homologous to secretin and are found exclusively in cells in the tuberal region of the hypothalamus, where they project to target nuclei responsible for wakefulness (see Figure 27.11).
Evidence from both dogs and mice suggests that the Orx2 mutation causes hyperexcitability of the neurons that generate REM sleep, and/or impairment of the circuits that inhibit REM sleep.
Clinically, narcoleptics are treated using stimulants such as methylphenidate (Ritalin^{™}), amphetamines, or modafanil (Provigil^{™}) to increase their overall level of arousal.

### Summary

All animals exhibit a restorative cycle of rest following activity, but only mammals divide the period of rest into distinct phases of non-REM and REM sleep.
Why humans (and many other animals) need a restorative phase of suspended consciousness accompanied by decreased metabolism and lowered body temperature is not known.
Even more mysterious is why the human brain is periodically active during sleep at levels not appreciably different from the waking state (that is, the neural activity during REM sleep).
Despite the electroencephalographic similarities, the psychological states of wakefulness and REM sleep are obviously different.
The highly organized sequence of human sleep states is actively generated by nuclei in the brainstem, most importantly the cholinergic nuclei of the pons--midbrain junction, the noradrenergic cells of the locus coeruleus, and the serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei.
The activity of the relevant cell groups controls the degree of mental alertness on a continuum from deep sleep to waking attentiveness.
These brainstem systems are in turn influenced by a circadian clocks located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and VLPO of the hypothalamus.
The clock adjusts periods of sleep and wakefulness to appropriate durations during the 24-hour cycle of light and darkness that is fundamental to life on Earth.