Vision: The Eye 251

the inherent uncertainty of the relationship between luminance values and their actual sources would be to generate the sensation of brightness elicited by a given luminance (e.g., in the brightness of the identical test patches in the figure) on the basis of what the luminance of the test patches had typically turned out to be in the past experience of human observers.
To get the gist of this explanation consider Figure C, which illustrates the point that the two equiluminant target patches in Figure A could have been generated by two differently painted surfaces in different illuminants, as in a comparison of the target patches on the left and middle cubes, or two similarly

reflecting surfaces in similar amounts of light, as in a comparison of the target patches on the middle and right cubes.
An expedient—and perhaps the only—way the visual system can cope with this ambiguity is to generate the perception of the stimulus in Figure A (and in Figure B) empirically, i.e., based on what the target patches typically turned out to signify in the past.
Since the equiluminant targets will have arisen from a variety of possible sources, it makes sense to have the brightness elicited by the patches determined statistically by the relative frequency of occurrence of that luminance in the particular context in which it is presented.
The advantage of seeing

luminance according to the relative probabilities of the possible sources of the stimulus is that percepts generated in this way give the observer the best chance of making appropriate behavioral responses to profoundly ambiguous stimuli.

## References

ADELSON, E.
H.
(1999) Light perception and lightness illusions.
In *The Cognitive Neurosciences*, 2nd Ed.
M.
Gazzaniga (ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
339–351.

PURVIS, D.
AND R.
B.
LOTTO (2003) *Why We See What We Do: An Empirical Theory of Vision*, Chapters 3 and 4.
Sunderland MA: Sinauer Associates, pp.
41–87.

discharge, and when the spot of light is turned off, the cell responds with a burst of action potentials (Figure 10.14A).
Complementary patterns of activity are found for each cell type when a dark spot is placed in the receptive field center (Figure 10.14B).
Thus, on-center cells increase their discharge rate to luminance increments in the receptive field center, whereas off-center cells increase their discharge rate to luminance decrements in the receptive field center.

On- and off-center ganglion cells are present in roughly equal numbers.
The receptive fields have overlapping distributions, so that every point on the retinal surface (that is, every part of visual space) is analyzed by several on-center and several off-center ganglion cells.
A rationale for having these two distinct types of retinal ganglion cells was suggested by Peter Schiller and his colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who examined the effects of pharmacologically inactivating on-center ganglion cells on a monkey’s ability to detect a variety of visual stimuli.
After silencing on-center ganglion cells, the animals showed a deficit in their ability to detect stimuli that were brighter than the background; however, they could still see objects that were darker than the background.

These observations imply that information about increases or decreases in luminance is carried separately to the brain by the axons of these two different types of retinal ganglion cells.
Having separate luminance “channels” means that changes in light intensity, whether increases or decreases, are always conveyed to the brain by an increased number of action potentials.
Because ganglion cells rapidly adapt to changes in luminance, their “resting” discharge rate in constant illumination is relatively low.
Although an increase in discharge rate above resting level serves as a reliable signal, a decrease in firing rate from an initially low rate of discharge might not.
Thus, having luminance changes signaled by two classes of adaptable cells provides unambiguous information about both luminance increments and decrements.

The functional differences between these two ganglion cell types can be understood in terms of both their anatomy and their physiological proper