The rich diversity of human personalities, abilities, and behavior is undoubtedly generated by the uniqueness of individual human brains.
These fascinating neurobiological differences among humans derive from both genetic and environmental influences.
The first steps in the construction of the brain's circuitry—the establishment of distinct brain regions, the generation of neurons, the formation of major axon tracts, the guidance of growing axons to appropriate targets, and the initiation of synaptogenesis—rely largely on the intrinsic cellular and molecular processes described in the previous chapters.
Once the basic patterns of brain connections are established, however, patterns of neuronal activity (including those that are elicited by experience) modify the synaptic circuitry of the developing brain.
Neuronal activity generated by interactions with the outside world in postnatal life thus provides a mechanism by which the environment can influence brain structure and function.
Many of the effects of activity are transduced via signaling pathways that modify levels of intracellular Ca^{2+} and thus influence local cytoskeletal organization as well as gene expression (see Chapter 7).
This activity-mediated influence on the developing brain is most consequential during temporal windows called critical periods.
As humans and other mammals mature, the brain becomes increasingly refractory to the lessons of experience, and the cellular mechanisms that modify neural connectivity become less effective.

### Critical Periods

The cellular and molecular mechanisms outlined in Chapters 21 and 22 construct a nervous system of impressive anatomical complexity.
These mechanisms and their developmental consequences are sufficient to create some remarkably sophisticated innate or “instinctual” behaviors (see Box A in Chapter 30).
For most animals, the behavioral repertoire, including foraging, fighting, and mating strategies, largely relies on patterns of connectivity established by intrinsic developmental mechanisms.
However, the nervous systems of complex (“higher”) animals, including humans, clearly adapt to and are influenced by the particular circumstances of an individual's environment.
These environmental factors are especially influential in early life, during temporal windows called critical periods.
In some cases, such as the acquisition of language, instructive influences from the environment are obviously required for the normal development of the behavior (i.e.
exposure to the individual's native language).
Moreover, some behaviors, such as imprinting in birds (Box A), are expressed only if animals have certain spe