patient to be generally normal and to have relatively normal vision, except for one serious deficit: She appeared to be incapable of visually perceiving motion. Before you decide that not seeing motion would be a minor impairment, imagine what it would be like to see the world in snapshots. Zihl's patient complained that when she poured coffee into a cup, it appeared at one moment to be frozen at the bottom of the cup and then suddenly it had filled the cup and covered the table. More ominously, she had trouble crossing the street—one moment she would perceive cars to be in the distance, and the next moment they would be right next to her. Clearly, this seemingly minor loss of motion perception had profound ramifications for the woman's lifestyle. The implication of this case is that motion perception may be based on specialized mechanisms located beyond striate cortex in the dorsal stream.

## The Ventral Stream

In parallel with the dorsal stream, a progression of areas from V1, V2, and V3 running ventrally toward the temporal lobes appears specialized for the analysis of visual attributes other than motion.

**Area V4.** One of the most-studied areas in the ventral stream is **area V4** (see Figures 10.27 and 10.28). V4 receives input from the blob and interblob regions of striate cortex via a relay in V2. Neurons in area V4 have larger receptive fields than cells in striate cortex, and many of the cells are both orientation selective and color selective. Although there is a good deal of ongoing speculation concerning the function of V4, this area appears to be important for both shape perception and color perception. If this area is damaged in monkeys, perceptual deficits involving both shape and color result.

A rare clinical syndrome in humans known as *achromatopsia* is characterized by a partial or complete loss of color vision despite the presence of normal functional cones in the retina. People with this condition describe their world as drab, consisting of only shades of gray. Imagine how unappetizing a gray banana would be! Because *achromatopsia* is associated with cortical damage in the occipital and temporal lobes, without damage to V1, the LGN, or the retina, the syndrome suggests that there is specialized color processing in the ventral stream. Consistent with the coexistence of color-sensitive and shape-sensitive cells in the ventral stream, *achromatopsia* is usually accompanied by deficits in form perception. Some researchers have proposed that V4 is a particularly critical area for color and form perception, but whether the lesions associated with *achromatopsia* correspond to a human V4 area is controversial.

**Area IT.** Beyond V4 in the ventral stream are cortical areas that contain neurons with complicated spatial receptive fields. A major output of V4 is an area in the inferior temporal lobe known as **area IT**. A wide variety of colors and abstract shapes have been found to be good stimuli for cells in IT. As we will see in Chapter 24, this area appears to be important for both visual perception and visual memory. One of the most intriguing findings concerning IT is that a small percentage of the neurons responds strongly to pictures of faces. These cells may also respond to stimuli other than faces, but faces produce a particularly vigorous response, and some faces are more effective stimuli than others. This finding in monkeys appears consistent with images made using fMRI in humans, which indicate that there is a small area in the human brain that is more responsive to faces than to other