Although our visual system provides us with a unified picture of the world around us, this picture has multiple facets. Objects we see have shape and color. They have position in space, and sometimes they move. For us to see each of these properties, neurons somewhere in the visual system must be sensitive to them. Moreover, because we have two eyes, we actually have two visual images in our head, and somehow they must be merged.

In Chapter 9, we saw that in many ways the eye acts like a camera. But starting with the retina, the rest of the visual system is far more elaborate, far more interesting, and capable of doing far more than any camera. For example, we saw that the retina does not simply pass along information about the patterns of light and dark that fall on it. Rather, the retina *extracts* information about different facets of the visual image. There are more than 100 million photoreceptors in the retina but only 1 million axons leaving the eye carrying information to the rest of the brain. What we perceive about the world around us, therefore, depends on what information is extracted by the retina and how this information is analyzed and interpreted by the rest of the central nervous system (CNS). An example is color. There is no such thing as color in the physical world; there is simply a spectrum of visible wavelengths of light that are reflected by objects around us. Based on the information extracted by the three types of cone photoreceptors, however, our brain somehow synthesizes a rainbow of colors and fills our world with it.

In this chapter, we explore how the information extracted by the retina is analyzed by the central visual system. The pathway serving conscious visual perception includes the *lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)* of the thalamus and the primary visual cortex, also called *area 17, V1, or striate cortex*. We will see that the information funneled through this geniculocortical pathway is processed in parallel by neurons specialized for the analysis of different stimulus attributes. The striate cortex then feeds this information to more than two dozen different extrastriate cortical areas in the temporal and parietal lobes, and many of these appear to be specialized for different types of analysis.

Much of what we know about the central visual system was first worked out in the domestic cat and then extended to the rhesus monkey, *Macaca mulatta*. The macaque monkey, as it is also called, relies heavily on vision for survival in its habitat, as do we humans. In fact, tests of the performance of this primate's visual system show that in virtually all respects, it rivals that of humans. Thus, although most of this chapter concerns the organization of the macaque visual system, most neuroscientists agree that it approximates very closely the situation in our own brain.

Although visual neuroscience cannot yet explain many aspects of visual perception (some interesting examples are shown in Figure 10.1), significant progress has been made in answering a more basic question: How do neurons represent the different facets of the visual world? By examining those stimuli that make different neurons in the visual cortex respond, and how these response properties arise, we begin to see how the brain portrays the visual world around us.

## ▼ THE RETINOFUGAL PROJECTION

The neural pathway that leaves the eye, beginning with the optic nerve, is often referred to as the **retinofugal projection**. The suffix *-fugal* is from the Latin word meaning 'to flee' and is commonly used in neuroanatomy to describe a pathway that is directed away from a structure. Thus, a centrifugal projection goes away from the center, a corticofugal projection goes