Chapter Five

# Summary

Synapses communicate the information carried by action potentials from one neuron to the next in neural circuits.
The cellular mechanisms that underlie synaptic transmission are closely related to the mechanisms that generate other types of neuronal electrical signals, namely ion flow through membrane channels.
In the case of electrical synapses, these channels are gap junctions; direct but passive flow of current through the gap junctions is the basis for transmission.
In the case of chemical synapses, channels with smaller and more selective pores are activated by the binding of neurotransmitters to postsynaptic receptors after release from the presynaptic terminal.
The large number of neurotransmitters in the nervous system can be divided into two broad classes: small-molecule transmitters and neuropeptides.
Neurotransmitters are synthesized from defined precursors by regulated enzymatic pathways, packaged into one of several types of synaptic vesicle, and released into the synaptic cleft in a $\mathrm{Ca^{2+}}$-dependent manner.
Many synapses release more than one type of neurotransmitter, and multiple transmitters can even be packaged within the same synaptic vesicle.
Transmitter agents are released presynaptically in units or quanta, reflecting their storage within synaptic vesicles.
Vesicles discharge their contents into the synaptic cleft when the presynaptic depolarization generated by the invasion of an action potential opens voltage-gated calcium channels, allowing $\mathrm{Ca^{2+}}$ to enter the presynaptic terminal.
How calcium triggers neurotransmitter release is not yet established, but synaptotagmin, SNAREs, and a number of other proteins found within the presynaptic terminal are clearly involved.
Postsynaptic receptors are a diverse group of proteins that transduce binding of neurotransmitters into electrical signals by opening or closing postsynaptic ion channels.
The postsynaptic currents produced by the synchronous opening or closing of ion channels changes the conductance of the postsynaptic cell, thus increasing or decreasing its excitability.
Conductance changes that increase the probability of firing an action potential are excitatory, whereas those that decrease the probability of generating an action potential are inhibitory.
Because postsynaptic neurons are usually innervated by many different inputs, the integrated effect of the conductance changes underlying all EPSPs and IPSPs produced in a postsynaptic cell at any moment determines whether or not the cell fires an action potential.
Two broadly different families of neurotransmitter receptors have evolved to carry out the postsynaptic signaling actions of neurotransmitters.
The postsynaptic effects of neurotransmitters are terminated by the degradation of the transmitter in the synaptic cleft, by transport of the transmitter back into cells, or by diffusion out of the synaptic cleft.