Early Brain Development 515

tion of cranial nerves in the developing brain.
Mutation or ectopic activation of Hox genes in mice alters the position of specific cranial nerves, or prevents their formation.
Mutation of the HoxA-1 gene by homologous recombination—the so-called "knockout" strategy for targeting mutations to specific genes—prevents normal formation of rhombomeres.
In these animals, development of the external, middle, and inner ear is also compromised, and cranial nerve ganglia are fused and located incorrectly.
Conversely, when the HoxA-1 gene is expressed in a rhombomere where it is usually not seen, the ectopic expression causes changes in rhombomere identity and subsequent differentiation.
It is likely that problems in rhombomere formation are the underlying cause of congenital nervous system defects involving cranial nerves, ganglia, and peripheral structures derived from the cranial neural crest (the part of the

neural crest that arises from the hindbrain).

The exact relationship between early patterns of rhombomere-specific gene transcription and subsequent cranial nerve development remains a puzzle.
Nevertheless, the correspondence between these repeating units in the embryonic brain and similar iterated units in the development of the insect body (see Figure 21.5) suggests that differential expression of transcription factors in specific regions is essential for the normal development of many species.
In a wide variety of animals, spatially and temporally distinct patterns of transcription factor expression coincide with spatially and temporally distinct patterns of differentiation, including the differentiation of the nervous system.
The idea that the bulges and folds in the neural tube are segments defined by patterns of gene expression provides an attractive framework for understanding the molecular

basis of pattern formation in the developing vertebrate brain.

## References

CARPENTER, E.
M., J.
M.
GODDARD, O.
CHISAKA, N.
R.
MANLEY AND M.
CAPECCHI (1993) Loss of HoxA-1 (Hox-1.6) function results in the reorganization of the murine hindbrain.
Development 118: 1063-1075.
GUTHRIE, S.
(1996) Patterning the hindbrain.
Curr.
Opin.
Neurobiol.
6: 41-48.
LUMSDEN, A.
AND R.
KEYNES (1989) Segmental patterns of neuronal development in the chick hindbrain.
Nature 337: 424-428.
VON KUPFFER, K.
(1906) Die morphogenie des central nerven systems.
In Handbuch der vergleichende und experimentelle Entwicklungslehre der Werbeltiere, Vol.
2, 3: 1-272.
Fischer Verlag, Jena.
WILKINSON, D.
G.
AND R.
KRUMLAUF (1990) Molecular approaches to the segmentation of the hindbrain.
TINS 13: 335-339.
ZHANG, M.
AND 9 OTHERS (1993) Ectopic HoxA-1 induces rhombomere transformation in mouse hindbrain.
Development 120: 2431-2442.

The patterned expression of Hox genes, as well as other developmentally regulated transcription factors (many with homology to other patterning genes that influence development in Drosophila) and signaling molecules, does not by itself determine the fate of a group of embryonic neural precursors.
Instead, this aspect of regionally distinct transcription factor expression during early brain development contributes to a broader series of genetic and cellular processes that eventually produce fully differentiated brain regions with appropriate classes of neurons and glia.

## Genetic Abnormalities and Altered Human Brain Development

The recent explosion of information about molecules that influence brain development provides a basis for reevaluating the causes of a number of congenital brain malformations, as well as various forms of mental retardation.
For instance, some forms of hydrocephalus (caused by impeded flow of cerebrospinal fluid, which increases pressure and results in enlarged ventricles and eventually cortical atrophy as a result of compression) can be traced to mutations of genes on the X chromosome, especially those in the L1 cell adhesion molecule (see Chapter 22).
Similarly, fragile-X syndrome, the most common form of congenital mental retardation, is associated with triplet repeats in a subset of genes on the X chromosome, particularly the fragile-X protein, which is involved in stabilizing dendritic processes and synapses.

Beyond these X-linked abnormalities, there are at least two genetic disorders that compromise the nervous system generated by single gene mutations in homeobox-like transcription factors.
Aniridia (characterized by loss