# The Auditory System

## Overview

The auditory system is one of the engineering masterpieces of the human body.
At the heart of the system is an array of miniature acoustical detectors packed into a space no larger than a pea.
These detectors can faithfully transduce vibrations as small as the diameter of an atom, and they can respond a thousand times faster than visual photoreceptors.
Such rapid auditory responses to acoustical cues facilitate the initial orientation of the head and body to novel stimuli, especially those that are not initially within the field of view.
Although humans are highly visual creatures, much human communication is mediated by the auditory system; indeed, loss of hearing can be more socially debilitating than blindness.
From a cultural perspective, the auditory system is essential not only to understanding speech, but also to music, one of the most aesthetically sophisticated forms of human expression.
For these and other reasons, audition represents a fascinating and especially important mode of sensation.

## Sound

In physical terms, sound refers to pressure waves generated by vibrating air molecules (somewhat confusingly, sound is used more casually to refer to an auditory percept).
Sound waves are much like the ripples that radiate outward when a rock is thrown in a pool of water.
However, instead of occurring across a two-dimensional surface, sound waves propagate in three dimensions, creating spherical shells of alternating compression and rarefaction.
Like all wave phenomena, sound waves have four major features: waveform, phase, amplitude (usually expressed in log units known as decibels, abbreviated dB), and frequency (expressed in cycles per second or Hertz, abbreviated Hz).
For human listeners, the amplitude and frequency of a sound pressure change at the ear roughly correspond to loudness and pitch, respectively.

The waveform of a sound stimulus is its amplitude plotted against time.
It helps to begin by visualizing an acoustical waveform as a sine wave.
At the same time, it must be kept in mind that sounds composed of single sine waves (i.e.
pure tones) are extremely rare in nature; most sounds in speech, for example, consist of acoustically complex waveforms.
Interestingly, such complex waveforms can often be modeled as the sum of sinusoidal waves of varying amplitudes, frequencies, and phases.
In engineering applications, an algorithm called the Fourier transform decomposes a complex signal into its sinusoidal components.
In the auditory system, as will be apparent later in the chapter, the inner ear acts as a sort of acoustical prism, decomposing complex sounds into a myriad of constituent tones.