# The Somatic Sensory System

## Overview

The somatic sensory system has two major components: a subsystem for the detection of mechanical stimuli (e.g.
light touch, vibration, pressure, and cutaneous tension), and a subsystem for the detection of painful stimuli and temperature.
Together, these two subsystems give humans and other animals the ability to identify the shapes and textures of objects, to monitor the internal and external forces acting on the body at any moment, and to detect potentially harmful circumstances.
This chapter focuses on the mechanosensory subsystem; the pain and temperature subsystem is taken up in the following chapter.

Mechanosensory processing of external stimuli is initiated by the activation of a diverse population of cutaneous and subcutaneous mechanoreceptors at the body surface that relays information to the central nervous system for interpretation and ultimately action.
Additional receptors located in muscles, joints, and other deep structures monitor mechanical forces generated by the musculoskeletal system and are called proprioceptors.
Mechanosensory information is carried to the brain by several ascending pathways that run in parallel through the spinal cord, brainstem, and thalamus to reach the primary somatic sensory cortex in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe.
The primary somatic sensory cortex projects in turn to higher-order association cortices in the parietal lobe, and back to the subcortical structures involved in mechanosensory information processing.

## Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Somatic Sensory Receptors

The specialized sensory receptors in the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues are dauntingly diverse (Table 8.1).
They include free nerve endings in the skin, nerve endings associated with specializations that act as amplifiers or filters, and sensory terminals associated with specialized transducing cells that influence the ending by virtue of synapse-like contacts.
Based on function, this variety of receptors can be divided into three groups: mechanoreceptors, nociceptors, and thermoceptors.
On the basis of their morphology, the receptors near the body surface can also be divided into free and encapsulated types.
Nociceptor and thermoceptor specializations are referred to as free nerve endings because the unmyelinated terminal branches of these neurons ramify widely in the upper regions of the dermis and epidermis (as well as in some deeper tissues); their role in pain and temperature sensation is discussed in Chapter 9.
Most other cutaneous receptors show some degree of encapsulation, which helps determine the nature of the stimuli to which they respond.

Despite their variety, all somatic sensory receptors work in fundamentally the same way: Stimuli applied to the skin deform or otherwise change the