Chapter 3

### Overview

The action potential, the primary electrical signal generated by nerve cells, reflects changes in membrane permeability to specific ions.
Present understanding of these changes in ionic permeability is based on evidence obtained by the voltage clamp technique, which permits detailed characterization of permeability changes as a function of membrane potential and time.
For most types of axons, these changes consist of a rapid and transient rise in sodium (Na^{+}) permeability, followed by a slower but more prolonged rise in potassium (K^{+}) permeability.
Both permeabilities are voltage-dependent, increasing as the membrane potential depolarizes.
The kinetics and voltage dependence of Na^{+} and K^{+} permeabilities provide a complete explanation of action potential generation.
Depolarizing the membrane potential to the threshold level causes a rapid, self-sustaining increase in Na^{+} permeability that produces the rising phase of the action potential; however, the Na^{+} permeability increase is short-lived and is followed by a slower increase in K^{+} permeability that restores the membrane potential to its usual negative resting level.
A mathematical model that describes the behavior of these ionic permeabilities predicts virtually all of the observed properties of action potentials.
Importantly, this same ionic mechanism permits action potentials to be propagated along the length of neuronal axons, explaining how electrical signals are conveyed throughout the nervous system.

### Ionic Currents Across Nerve Cell Membranes

The previous chapter introduced the idea that nerve cells generate electrical signals by virtue of a membrane that is differentially permeable to various ion species.
In particular, a transient increase in the permeability of the neuronal membrane to Na^{+} initiates the action potential.
This chapter considers exactly how this increase in Na^{+} permeability occurs.
A key to understanding this phenomenon is the observation that action potentials are initiated only when the neuronal membrane potential becomes more positive than a threshold level.
This observation suggests that the mechanism responsible for the increase in Na^{+} permeability is sensitive to the membrane potential.
Therefore, if one could understand how a change in membrane potential activates Na^{+} permeability, it should be possible to explain how action potentials are generated.

The fact that the Na^{+} permeability that generates the membrane potential change is itself sensitive to the membrane potential presents both conceptual and practical obstacles to studying the mechanism of the action potential.
A practical problem is the difficulty of systematically varying the membrane