in the spatial comparison of three different opposing processes: light versus dark, red versus green, and blue versus yellow.

## Parallel Processing

One of the important concepts that emerges from our discussion of the retina is the idea of **parallel processing** in the visual system. Here's why. First, we view the world with not one but two eyes that provide two parallel streams of information. In the central visual system, these streams are compared to give information about *depth*, the distance of an object from the observer. Second, there appear to be independent streams of information about light and dark that arise from the ON-center and OFF-center ganglion cells in each retina. Third, ganglion cells of both ON and OFF varieties have different types of receptive fields and response properties. M cells can detect subtle contrasts over their large receptive fields and are likely to contribute to low-resolution vision. P cells have small receptive fields that are well suited for the discrimination of fine detail. P cells and nonM-nonP cells are specialized for the separate processing of red-green and blue-yellow information.

## ▼ CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this chapter, we have seen how light emitted by or reflected off objects in space can be imaged by the eye onto the retina. Light energy is first converted into membrane potential changes in the mosaic of photoreceptors. It is interesting to note that the transduction mechanism in photoreceptors is very similar to that in olfactory receptor cells, both of which involve cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels. Photoreceptor membrane potential is converted into a chemical signal (the neurotransmitter glutamate), which is again converted into membrane potential changes in the postsynaptic bipolar and horizontal cells. This process of electrical-to-chemical-to-electrical signaling repeats again and again, until the presence of light or dark or color is finally converted to a change in the action potential firing frequency of the ganglion cells.

The information from the 125 million photoreceptors is funneled into 1 million ganglion cells. In the central retina, particularly the fovea, relatively few photoreceptors feed each ganglion cell, whereas in the peripheral retina, thousands of receptors do. Thus, the mapping of visual space onto the array of optic nerve fibers is not uniform. Rather, in 'neural space,' there is an overrepresentation of the central few degrees of visual space, and signals from individual cones are more important. This specialization ensures high acuity in central vision but also requires that the eye move to bring the images of objects of interest onto the fovea.

As we shall see in the next chapter, there is good reason to believe that the different types of information that arise from different types of ganglion cells are, at least in the early stages, processed independently. Parallel streams of information—for example, from the right and left eyes—remain segregated at the first synaptic relay in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus. The same can be said for the M-cell and P-cell synaptic relays in the LGN. In the visual cortex, it appears that parallel paths may process different visual attributes. For example, the distinction in the retina between neurons that do and do not convey information about color is preserved in the visual cortex. In general, each of the more than two-dozen visual cortical areas may be specialized for the analysis of different types of retinal output.