pupils, which allows more light to enter the eye. However, the diameter of the human pupil only ranges from about 2–8 mm, meaning that changes in its size can increase the pupil area by a factor of only 16. The larger component of dark adaptation involves the regeneration of unbleached rhodopsin and an adjustment of the functional circuitry of the retina so that information from more rods is available to each ganglion cell. Because of this tremendous increase in sensitivity, when the dark-adapted eye goes back into bright light, it is temporarily saturated. This explains what happens when you first go outside on a bright day. Over the next 5–10 minutes, the eyes undergo **light adaptation**, reversing the changes in the retina that accompanied dark adaptation. This light-dark adaptation in the duplex retina gives our visual system the ability to operate in light intensities ranging from moonless midnight to bright high noon.

**Calcium's Role in Light Adaptation.** In addition to the factors mentioned above, the ability of the eye to adapt to changes in light level relies on changes in calcium concentration within the cones. When you step out into bright light from a dark theater, initially the cones are hyperpolarized as much as possible (i.e., to $E_K$, the equilibrium potential for $K^+$). If the cones stayed in this state, we would be unable to see changes in light level. As we discussed above, the constriction of the pupil helps a bit in reducing the light entering the eye. However, the most important change is a gradual depolarization of the membrane back to about $-35$ mV.

The reason this happens stems from the fact that the cGMP-gated sodium channels we discussed previously also admit calcium. In the dark, $Ca^{2+}$ enters the cones and has an inhibitory effect on the enzyme (guanylyl cyclase) that synthesizes cGMP. When the cGMP-gated channels close, the flow of $Ca^{2+}$ into the photoreceptor is curtailed; as a result, more cGMP is synthesized (because the synthetic enzyme is less inhibited), thereby allowing the cGMP-gated channels to open again. Stated more simply, when the channels close, a process is initiated that gradually reopens them even if the light level does not change. Calcium also appears to affect photopigments and phosphodiesterase in ways that decrease their response to light. These calcium-based mechanisms ensure that the photoreceptors are always able to register relative changes in light level, though information about the absolute level is lost.

## ▼ RETINAL PROCESSING

Well before the discovery of how photoreceptors work, researchers were able to explain some of the ways the retina processes visual images. Since about 1950, neuroscientists have studied the action potential discharges of retinal ganglion cells as the retina is stimulated with light. The pioneers of this approach were neurophysiologists Keffer Hartline, Stephen Kuffler, and Horace Barlow, with Hartline and Kuffler working in the United States and Barlow working in England. Their research uncovered which aspects of a visual image were encoded as ganglion cell output. Early studies of horseshoe crabs and frogs gave way to investigations of cats and monkeys. Researchers learned that similar principles are involved in retinal processing across a wide range of species.

Progress in understanding how ganglion cell properties are generated by synaptic interactions in the retina has been slower. This is because *only ganglion cells fire action potentials*; all other cells in the retina (except some amacrine cells) respond to stimulation with graded changes in membrane potential. The detection of such graded changes requires technically challenging