using simple extracellular recording methods (see Box 4.1). It was not until the early 1970s that John Dowling and Frank Werblin at Harvard University were able to show how ganglion cell responses are built from the interactions of horizontal and bipolar cells (Box 9.5).

The most direct path for information flow in the retina is from a cone photoreceptor to bipolar cell to ganglion cell. At each synaptic relay, the responses are modified by the lateral connections of horizontal cells and amacrine cells. We first focus on how information is transformed as it passes from photoreceptors to bipolar cells and then explore ganglion cell output in the last section.

## Transformations in the Outer Plexiform Layer

Photoreceptors, like other neurons, release neurotransmitter when depolarized. The transmitter released by photoreceptors is the amino acid glutamate. As we have seen, photoreceptors are depolarized in the dark and are *hyperpolarized* by light. We thus have the counterintuitive situation in which photoreceptors actually release fewer transmitter molecules in the light than in the dark. However, we can reconcile this apparent paradox if we take the point of view that *dark* rather than *light* is the preferred stimulus for a photoreceptor. Thus, when a shadow passes across a photoreceptor, it responds by depolarizing and releasing neurotransmitter.

In the outer plexiform layer, each photoreceptor is in synaptic contact with two types of retinal neuron: bipolar cells and horizontal cells. Recall that bipolar cells create the direct pathway from photoreceptors to ganglion cells; horizontal cells feed information laterally in the outer plexiform layer to influence the activity of neighboring bipolar cells and photoreceptors (see Figures 9.11 and 9.12).

**Bipolar Cell Receptive Fields.** Bipolar cells can be categorized into two classes, based on their responses to the glutamate released by photoreceptors. In **OFF bipolar cells**, glutamate-gated cation channels mediate a classical depolarizing EPSP from the influx of $\mathrm{Na^{+}}$. **ON bipolar cells** have G-protein-coupled receptors and respond to glutamate by hyperpolarizing. Notice that the names OFF and ON refer to whether these cells depolarize in response to light *off* (more glutamate) or to light *on* (less glutamate).

Each bipolar cell receives direct synaptic input from a cluster of photoreceptors. The number of photoreceptors in this cluster ranges from one at the center of the fovea to thousands in the peripheral retina. In addition to these direct connections with photoreceptors, bipolar cells also are connected via horizontal cells to a circumscribed ring of photoreceptors that surrounds this central cluster. The **receptive field** of a bipolar cell (or any other cell in the visual system) is *the area of retina that, when stimulated with light, changes the cell's membrane potential*. The receptive field of a bipolar cell consists of two parts: a circular area of retina providing direct photoreceptor input, called the *receptive field center*, and a surrounding area of retina providing input via horizontal cells, called the *receptive field surround* (Figure 9.22a). Receptive field dimensions can be measured in millimeters across the retina or, more commonly, in degrees of visual angle. One millimeter on the retina corresponds to a visual angle of about $3.5^{\circ}$. Bipolar cell receptive field diameters range from a fraction of a degree in the central retina to several degrees in the peripheral retina.

The response of a bipolar cell's membrane potential to light in the receptive field center is opposite to that of light in the surround. For example, if illumination of the center causes depolarization of the bipolar cell