**Vision** is remarkable—it lets us detect things as tiny and close as a mosquito on the tip of our nose, or as immense and far away as a galaxy near the fringes of the universe. Sensitivity to light enables animals, including humans, to detect prey, predators, and mates. Based on the light bounced into our eyes from objects around us, we somehow make sense of a complex world. While this process seems effortless, it is in reality extremely complicated. Indeed, it has proven quite difficult to make computer visual systems with even a small fraction of the capabilities of the human visual system.

Light is electromagnetic energy that is emitted in the form of waves. We live in a turbulent sea of electromagnetic radiation. Like any ocean, this sea has large waves and small waves, short wavelets and long rollers. The waves crash into objects and are absorbed, scattered, reflected, and bent. Because of the nature of electromagnetic waves and their interactions with the environment, the visual system can extract information about the world. This is a big job, and it requires a lot of neural machinery. However, the mastery of vision over the course of vertebrate evolution has had surprising rewards. It has provided new ways to communicate, given rise to brain mechanisms for predicting the trajectory of objects and events in time and space, allowed for new forms of mental imagery and abstraction, and led to the creation of a world of art. The significance of vision is perhaps best demonstrated by the fact that about half of the human cerebral cortex is involved with analyzing the visual world.

The mammalian visual system begins with the eye. At the back of the eye is the **retina**, which contains photoreceptors specialized to convert light energy into neural activity. The rest of the eye acts like a camera and forms crisp, clear images of the world on the retina. Like a camera, the eye automatically adjusts to differences in illumination and automatically focuses itself on objects of interest. The eye has some additional features not yet available on cameras, such as the ability to track moving objects (by eye movement) and the ability to keep its transparent surfaces clean (by tears and blinking).

While much of the eye functions like a camera, the retina is much more than film. In fact, as mentioned in Chapter 7, the retina is actually part of the brain. (Think about that the next time you look deeply into someone's eyes.) In a sense, each eye has two overlapping retinas: one specialized for low light levels that we encounter from dusk to dawn, and another specialized for higher light levels and for the detection of color, from sunrise to sunset. Regardless of the time of day, however, the output of the retina is not a faithful reproduction of the intensity of the light falling on it. Rather, the retina is specialized to detect *differences* in the intensity of light falling on different parts of it. Image processing is well under way in the retina, before any visual information reaches the rest of the brain.

Axons of retinal neurons are bundled into optic nerves, which distribute visual information (in the form of action potentials) to several brain structures that perform different functions. Some targets of the optic nerves are involved in regulating biological rhythms, which are synchronized with the light-dark daily cycle; others are involved in the control of eye position and optics. However, the first synaptic relay in the pathway that serves visual perception occurs in a cell group of the dorsal thalamus called the *lateral geniculate nucleus*, or *LGN*. From the LGN, visual information ascends to the cerebral cortex, where it is interpreted and remembered.

In this chapter, we explore the eye and the retina. We'll see how light carries information to our visual system, how the eye forms images on the retina, and how the retina converts light energy into neural signals that can